\begin{resumo}[Abstract]
\begin{otherlanguage*}{english}

The networks monitoring scenario is constantly changing. Not so long ago, the
evolution of grids to clouds generated a need to notch already established
monitoring tools. In an attempt to align to the new trend, LRG implemented its
own private cloud and recently, aims to implement a new architecture for
autonomic monitoring private clouds. In the past works, PCMONS was created and
ensemble to Cloud scenario with Nagios plus Open Stack/Open Nebula. However,
right now that is a complete redesign. To place that, we need to think which
monitoring tools to deploy, as well as, how the metrics of a Cloud will be
stored for analysis, being either in real time or whether in a longer timeline,
eventually a time series. This provides a possible analysis of frequency in a
sort of events at a private cloud, and eventual decision making concerning to
find out resources available in it. Make a decision in the resources management
through statistical analysis is a principle that guides to self-management of a
Cloud, adapting it to unpredictable changes and hiding the inherent complexity
from operators and users. To reach such a level of complexity in project
implementation, it is necessary to break the problem and review a real scenario
of clouds, where a mass of monitored data generated due to the massive amount of
events, eventually from a complex architecture and large amount of physical and
virtual machines. Therefore, we are not talking about traditional RDBMS
technology since currently; there are several database systems appropriate to
Big Data paradigm. The focus of this final work is exactly do a study driven to
unleash a better schema of NoSQL HBase in place of store the monitored metrics
of LRGâ€™s cloud. Along the way, is analyzed choosing of HBase, pros and cons of a
certain database schema, as well as, a comparison of NoSQL versus SQL.
Subsequently, following the LRG research and eventual implementation of more
parts of the problem, will be possible to deploy the autonomic cloud
architecture proposed. 
\\\\
\noindent
Key-words: Autonomic Computing. Decision Theory. Big Data, Cloud Computing,
NoSQL, HBase Schema.

\end{otherlanguage*}
\end{resumo}